Blog post: Browsing curated databases (#50)
aiidateam/aiida-website: docs/news/posts/2024-10-18-exploring-aiida-database.md

---
blogpost: true
category: Blog
tags: querying, database, data, materialscloud

> author: Giovanni Pizzi, Francisco Ramirez, Kristjan Eimre

Reviewer: Yep, i think it's probably good to have authors explicitly.

date: 2024-10-18
---

# Exploring an AiiDA Database You Didn't Create

> A common source of problems for new users of AiiDA often arises when they receive an exported AiiDA database (i.e. an AiiDA archive) and want to get an idea of its content but don't know how. In this blog post, we illustrate on how to do this for an AiiDA database that is published on the Materials Cloud Archive, titled  ["Two-dimensional materials from high-throughput computational exfoliation of experimentally known compounds"](https://archive.materialscloud.org/record/2024.157).

Reviewer: yep, that sounds great, thanks!

The description of this database mentions that it contains a set of two dimensional materials, and for a subset of them, various properties are calculated, including the electronic band structures (and also the corresponding band gaps).

To demonstrate how to start from an unfamiliar database, understand its layout, and query for a particular property, we set a goal for this blog post to filter the materials contained in the AiiDA database based on their band gaps and create a corresponding table.
This will hopefully give you guidance on how to apply and extend queries for your own needs.

> Note that while this is a curated database, meaning that it has supplementary metadata provided to help understand it, most of this blog post also applies to uncurated AiiDA archives.

Reviewer: :+1:

## Setup

> This analysis can be run with AiiDA v2+. One possibility to quickly get started is to use the [Quantum Mobile](https://quantum-mobile.readthedocs.io/) virtual machine. Currently the latest version is 24.04.0, which has `aiida-core` v2.4.3 available.

Reviewer: Ok, yep, i agree that Quantum mobile could be left out. will remove this.

You will also need to download the AiiDA archive `two_dimensional_database.aiida` from [the corresponding Materials Cloud Archive entry](https://archive.materialscloud.org/record/2024.157), which can also be done via wget:

```bash
$ wget 'https://archive.materialscloud.org/record/file?record_id=2396&filename=two_dimensional_database.aiida' -O two_dimensional_database.aiida
```

Next, we need to make the archive data available for the AiiDA environment, and there are two possibilities for this. The first and traditional way is to [set up an AiiDA profile](https://aiida.readthedocs.io/projects/aiida-core/en/stable/installation/guide_complete.html#create-a-profile) and import the archive data with

```bash
$ verdi archive import two_dimensional_database.aiida
```

> The other way is to set up a read-only profile directly from an archive file, which is more suitable for our current use case, as we just want to investigate and analyze the contents without modifying or extending the data. In this case, we can use (Note: this was introduced in AiiDA v2.5.0 and thus is not available in the current Quantum Mobile):

Reviewer: :+1:

```bash
$ verdi profile setup core.sqlite_zip --filepath two_dimensional_database.aiida
```

It's also important to note that this profile is running on the `core.sqlite_zip` storage backend, that can have [some limitations for some queries](https://aiida.readthedocs.io/projects/aiida-core/en/stable/topics/storage.html), but these don't affect the analysis of this blog post.

## Finding band gap nodes

As our goal is to filter materials based on their band gaps, the first step is to find at least one AiiDA node (i.e. its universally unique identifier (UUID)) that contains the band gap value. Based on this we can later see how it is organized relative to the structure node, which will help us write the AiiDA query to collect and filter based on all band gap values for all materials.

### Using supplementary metadata

> When AiiDA databases are published, it is recommended that authors provide a supplementary metadata file to help users understand how data is internally linked together. For this current dataset, this is the case, as the authors have provided `structures.json` (inside the tar `2D_materials.tar.gz` from the [published entry](https://archive.materialscloud.org/record/2024.157)), which contains a list of all the computationally investigated structures, together with AiiDA UUID values for corresponding calculated properties. Here's an excerpt from that file:

Reviewer: I think it's not strictly necessary that they follow along exactly or download the file. they will see that the data is there via the excerpt. I would keep it like this currently. If they want to double-check, they should be able fairly easily.

```json
[
    {
        // ...
        "relaxed_2D_structure_uuid": "ba8bbdd9-defc-4292-af7d-ed3eb73f778e",
        "formula_reduced": "AgBr",
        "band_gap": 1.3,

>         "bands_uuid": "7fbb633d-a224-46b7-84b1-74a3ceca81e0",

Reviewer: i understand the comment. but I don't see an easy way of making the differently obtained uuids match without adding extra queries/content that's not really relevant and would perhaps confuse people.

        // ...
    },
    // ...
]
```

> where we can see for the silver bromide (AgBr) the AiiDA UUIDs for the relaxed structure itself and the bands property that we want to analyse (the band gap node is a close descendent of this node). This information is enough to continue to the next section, but let's also explore alternative ways to obtain it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
where we can see for the silver bromide (AgBr) the AiiDA UUIDs for the relaxed structure itself and the bands property that we want to analyse (the band gap node is a close descendent of this node). This information is enough to continue to the next section, but let's also explore alternative ways to obtain it (we will come back to this at the end of this blog post, promised).
```

Reviewer: I am not sure this is necessary. The alternative way of getting the UUID is explained in the next subsection, but i see how that might be confusing (basically what i meant with "Next section" is "Manually browsing the database"). Will update this to make it clearer.

### Direct investigation of the AiiDA archive

> If there is no supplementary metadata file nor a web app available, one can also directly investigate the data layout.

Reviewer: sorry, yep, i had the materials cloud web app here, but moved to the end. Better to remove reference.

First, check the AiiDA groups:

```bash
$ verdi group list --all-users
  PK  Label                                   Type string    User
----  --------------------------------------  -------------  -----------------------
  11  two_dimensional_database_2D_bandgaps    core           aiida@theossrv5.epfl.ch
  10  two_dimensional_database_2D_bands       core           aiida@theossrv5.epfl.ch
   6  two_dimensional_database_2D_phonons     core           aiida@theossrv5.epfl.ch
...
```

We see we have a group containing the band gap nodes. To see these, let's first start the interactive AiiDA shell:

```bash
$ verdi shell
```

> and then load the first band gap node from the group (and note the UUID):

Reviewer 2: I'd maybe also clarify a bit where the "band gap node" came from, i.e. a calcfunction that analyzed the band structure. When I first read that, I thought we were talking about a `BandsData` node, and I guess people who are familiar with AiiDA already would think the same.

Out[2]: <Dict: uuid: 138d1979-4aca-4a23-af18-38c707707585 (pk: 273)>
```

Finally, if the original AiiDA database author has not even provided groups, one could still write various [AiiDA queries](https://aiida.readthedocs.io/projects/aiida-core/en/stable/howto/query.html) that would allow one to find the band gap node (e.g. one could query for a specific type of Quantum Espresso calculation), but this is out of the scope of the current blog post.

## Manually browsing the database

Now that we have identified a band gap (or a band structure) node, let's see the various ways to explore the AiiDA provenance graph around it.

Let's open the AiiDA interactive shell:

```bash
$ verdi shell
```

We start by performing some browsing using the AiiDA API to explore the properties and connections of the selected node.

1. Load the node by using its UUID (note that the integer identifiers, called PKs, will most probably be different in your DB, but the UUIDs will always be the same):

    ```python
    In [1]: bandgap_node = load_node('138d1979-4aca-4a23-af18-38c707707585')
    In [2]: bandgap_node
    Out[2]: <Dict: uuid: 138d1979-4aca-4a23-af18-38c707707585 (pk: 692)>
    ```

> 2. One can check the attributes and discover that the band gap is in eV and is stored in the attribute named `band_gap` (knowing that the parser always returns eV, we are not going to use the units in the following, but one could generalise the query later if necessary). Note that the current node corresponds to a metal and we also see how this is represented.

Reviewer: I was considering this as well, but the UUID from the structures.json file is the BandsData node and that would make the following demonstration more cumbersome (basically you need to first go down from it to find the band gap value and then up from it to get the structure).

    ```

4. Then we can use `.inputs.LABEL_NAME` to access any of the inputs of this calculation. In our case, we will be interested in the one labeled `bands` (note that you can use tab completion to discover all input link labels: after `.inputs.` press the TAB key twice to see all available labels):

    ```python
    In [6]: bands_node = calculation_node.inputs.bands
    In [7]: bands_node
    Out[7]: <BandsData: uuid: 1b786a7c-639d-4fe4-a6e1-d0ac5b71bd39 (pk: 2829)>
    ```

5. In the same way we did before, we can now check the calculation that created this `BandsData` node (i.e., the band structure), to discover that it was a Quantum ESPRESSO run:

    ```python
    In [8]: qecalc_node = bands_node.creator
    In [9]: qecalc_node
    Out[9]: <CalcJobNode: uuid: c40cd8e3-638b-404e-b902-4377af810276 (pk: 18737) (aiida.calculations:quantumespresso.pw)>
    ```

6. Finally, we can check another input one level up to find the original crystal structure:

    ```python
    In [10]: qecalc_node.inputs.structure
    Out[10]: <StructureData: uuid: 9e65c339-2428-4fb1-8d75-a54da9f87879 (pk: 43956)>
    ```

    Note that we don't really need all of the intermediate node variables.

>     We did it mostly for convenience, but all of these steps can just be concatenated in a single long chain, as follows:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    We did it mostly for demonstration, but all of these steps can just be concatenated in a single long chain, as follows:
```

    ```python

>     In [11]: bandgap_node.creator.inputs.bands.creator.inputs.structure

Reviewer 2: I understand why it is done here in that way, and I'm fine with keeping it, but it just feel like going from the `bands_node` might overcomplicate things a bit. I guess this one was created by an additional `calcfunction` used to analyze the `BandsData`. One could remove a few extra steps, by just looking at the `BandsData` directly, though, again, I understand why the blog post starts from the curated `bands_node`. So feel free to ignore this comment.

Reviewer: Ok, yep, thanks for the comment. But i don't think you can directly get the band gap value from BandsData without some scripting, right? To do aiida queries like we do below, i think you need to have a separate band gap node. Not certain though, correct me if i'm wrong.

    Out[11]: <StructureData: uuid: 9e65c339-2428-4fb1-8d75-a54da9f87879 (pk: 43956)>
    ```

>     The advantage of the long string above is that after every dot you can use tab completion, and therefore (once you get used to it) it becomes very quick to browse advanced provenance graphs in the verdi shell.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    The advantage of the long string above is that after every dot you can use tab completion. Therefore, it can become very quick to browse advanced provenance graphs in the verdi shell and find the data you seek.
```

>     One more thing one might want to do is to check if there is a better way to distinguish the `CalcFunctionNode` that I got at `Out[5]` above (stored in `calculation_node = bandgap_node.creator`).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    One more thing one might want to do is to check if there is a better way to distinguish the `CalcFunctionNode` obtained at `Out[5]` above (stored in `calculation_node = bandgap_node.creator`).
```

    Let us check its attributes:

    ```python
    In [12]: bandgap_node.creator.attributes.keys()
    Out[12]: dict_keys(['first_line_source_code', 'source_code', 'source_file', 'function_name', 'sealed'])
    In [13]: bandgap_node.creator.attributes['function_name']
    Out[13]: 'get_bandgap_inline'
    ```

    This information will be useful in the following section, and will basically allow us to perform a query by filtering by the original function name.

> Now, after all these steps, we have a better understanding of the the structure of the data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now, after these steps, we have a better understanding of the the structure of the data.
```

Another useful tool to get a good idea of the connectivity is the graph generator.
One can use `verdi node graph generate` to visualize the provenance surrounding a node.
Limiting it to four levels up (ancestors) will be enough for this case; we will also avoid showing any descendants, since we are not interested here in calculations that used the data node as an input.

> Note that this command has to be executed outside of the verdi shell.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that this command is a normal terminal command, so it has to be executed outside of the verdi shell.
```

```bash
$ verdi node graph generate --process-in --process-out --ancestor-depth=4 --descendant-depth=0 138d1979-4aca-4a23-af18-38c707707585
```

The result should look something like this:

![provenance](../pics/2024-exploring-aiida-database.png)

## Systematic querying of the database

> Now that we have understood broadly the data layout (provenance links between nodes, their types, and some of the relevant attributes keys and values), let's now construct a query using the QueryBuilder in order to get the band structure of a set of 2D materials.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now that we have understood broadly the data layout (provenance links between nodes, their types, and some of the relevant attributes keys and values), let's now construct a query using the QueryBuilder in order to get the band structures of a set of 2D materials.
```

Create a new text file and copy the content below (these are essentially python scripts, so you can use the `.py` extension).
There are some comments which explain the purpose of each line of code, please read them carefully to understand how the query is constructed.
If you are not familiar with the `QueryBuilder`, we refer to the [official AiiDA documentation for more details](https://aiida.readthedocs.io/projects/aiida-core/en/stable/howto/query.html).

> ```python

Reviewer 2: This big code block suddenly is quite a shocker. Should we provide a downloadable link to the python file instead? And then show the individual `append` calls in separate code snippets, explaining them one by one as I did in my last blog post about the query builder (at least the first two, and possibly less verbose than what I did in the past)?

For me, if I was reading this blog post, and suddenly this block of code would appear, I'd probably close the tab 😅 it also looks more intimidating because of the long comments. These are very useful, so I'd keep them in the `.py` file for sure, but here, like this, the code snippet basically fills the entire page, and people would probably spend 15 minutes understanding the snippet.

Reviewer: I see your point, but I respectfully disagree. I think this script is one of the most valuable things for users, as they might want to come back to it and compare with their own queries. We could split it into snippets, but the length would be the same (or longer) and i think it would be more difficult to grasp. But i agree that the comments could be made a bit shorter, will do it. But we can also discuss further on this.

> from aiida.orm import QueryBuilder, Dict, CalculationNode, BandsData, StructureData

Reviewer 2: General comment, should we use the new QB syntax here?

Reviewer: I would prefer the old syntax, as i think the vast majority of AiiDA users (and readers of this post) are familiar with the old syntax.

# function name stored in the attributes is 'get_bandgap_inline'
qb.append(
    CalcFunctionNode,
    filters={'attributes.function_name': 'get_bandgap_inline'},
    with_outgoing='bandgap_node',
    tag='bandgap_calc'
)

# One of the inputs should be a BandsData (band structure node in AiiDA)
qb.append(BandsData, with_outgoing='bandgap_calc', tag='band_structure')

# This should have been computed by a calculation (we know it's always Quantum ESPRESSO
# in this specific DB, so I don't add more specific filters, but I could if I wanted to)
qb.append(CalculationNode, with_outgoing='band_structure', tag='qe')

# I want to get back the input crystal structure, and I want to get back
# the whole AiiDA node (indicated with '*') rather than just some attributes
qb.append(StructureData, with_outgoing='qe', project='*')

# So, now, summarizing, I have decided to project on two things: the band_gap and the structure node.
# I iterate on the query results, and I will get the two values for each matching result.
for band_gap, structure in qb.all():
    print("Band gap for {}: {:.3f} eV".format(structure.get_formula(), band_gap))
```

> With these few lines of code (essentially 8, removing the comments, the indentation, and the import line) one is able to perform a query that will return all the structures (and band gaps) that are below a 0.5 eV threshold, but still with a finite gap (remeber, for metals, the current database sets `'band_gap': None`, as we saw above).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With essentially just 8 lines of Python code (apart from the imports), one is able to perform a query that will return all the structures (and band gaps) that are below a 0.5 eV threshold, but still with a finite gap (remeber, for metals, the current database sets `'band_gap': None`, as we saw above).
```

You can now execute the script by running

```bash
$ verdi run <script_name>
```

Here is the output you should obtain if you only have the 2D materials database in your profile.

```bash

> Band gap for I4Zr2: 0.416 eV

Reviewer 2: I'd make this shorter, 5 entries or so should be enough.

Reviewer: :+1:

Band gap for Br2Nd2O2: 0.308 eV
Band gap for Br2Cr2O2: 0.448 eV
Band gap for Br4O2V2: 0.108 eV
Band gap for Cl2La2: 0.003 eV
Band gap for Cl2Co: 0.029 eV
Band gap for CdClO: 0.217 eV
Band gap for Cl2Er2S2: 0.252 eV
Band gap for Cl4O2V2: 0.010 eV
Band gap for CdClO: 0.251 eV
Band gap for GeI2La2: 0.369 eV
Band gap for Se2Zr: 0.497 eV
Band gap for Cu4Te2: 0.207 eV
Band gap for Br2Cr2S2: 0.441 eV
Band gap for Co2H4O4: 0.014 eV
Band gap for Cl2Er2S2: 0.252 eV
Band gap for Br2Co: 0.039 eV
Band gap for I2Ni: 0.295 eV
Band gap for I2N2Ti2: 0.020 eV
Band gap for Cl2Cu: 0.112 eV
Band gap for Cl2O2Yb2: 0.006 eV
Band gap for Cl2O2Yb2: 0.006 eV
Band gap for Br2Co: 0.196 eV
Band gap for C2: 0.000 eV
Band gap for Cl2La2: 0.008 eV
Band gap for Br2Nd2O2: 0.002 eV
Band gap for I2O2Pr2: 0.030 eV
Band gap for Cl2Co: 0.171 eV
Band gap for Cl2Cu: 0.158 eV
Band gap for Cl2Er2S2: 0.203 eV
Band gap for Br2Cr2S2: 0.427 eV
Band gap for S2Ti: 0.059 eV
Band gap for Br2Cr2O2: 0.486 eV
Band gap for I2Ni: 0.319 eV
```

> Now that you have learnt how to create such a query, you can have more fun adding additional statements before calling `.all()`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now that you have learnt how to create such a query, we invite you to have more fun, adding additional statements before the final call to `qb.all()`.
```

Here a couple of examples:

- You can check that the input code of the `qe` calculation was indeed a using the Quantum ESPRESSO plugin (`quantumespresso.pw`):

    ```python
    qb.append(Code, with_outgoing='qe', filters={'attributes.input_plugin': 'quantumespresso.pw'})
    ```

- You can project back also the total running time (wall time) of the Quantum ESPRESSO calculation (it is in an output node with link label `output_parameters`).

>   For this you needs to add a third element to the tuple when looping over `.all()`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  For this you need to add a third element to the tuple when looping over `.all()`:
```

    ```python
    qb.append(Dict, with_incoming='qe', edge_filters={'label':'output_parameters'}, project=['attributes.wall_time_seconds'])

    (...)

    for band_gap, structure, walltime in qb.all():
        print("Band gap for {}: {:.3f} eV (walltime = {}s)".format(structure.get_formula(), band_gap, walltime))
    ```

## Behind the scenes

As an extra comment, we strongly suggest using the QueryBuilder rather than going directly into the SQL database, even if you know SQL.

> We have spent significant efforts in making the QueryBuilder interface easy to use, and taking care ourselves of converting this into the corresponding SQL.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We have spent significant efforts in making the QueryBuilder interface as easy to use as possible, and taken care ourselves of converting this into the corresponding SQL.
```

```

So unless you feel ready to tackle this, we suggest that you stick with the simpler QueryBuilder interface!

## Materials Cloud discover section

We mentioned at the start of the post that this is a curated AiiDA database and discussed how it has an author-provided metadata file in JSON format available. However, that is not the only supplementary metadata for this AiiDA database. For a selection of AiiDA studies, the [Materials Cloud](https://www.materialscloud.org/) hosts Discover sections - curated web interfaces to browse the AiiDA data in an accessible manner. This current AiiDA database that this blog explores, contributes to the [Materials Cloud 2D crystals Discover section](https://www.materialscloud.org/discover/mc2d/).

> In this web interface, one can find materials, get access to their available calculated properties, as well to information on the provenance of such properties. Note, however, that the Discover section contains data from other AiiDA databases as well, so for exploring this specific AiiDA database, one would need to find a material that originates from it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this web interface, one can find materials, get access to their available calculated properties, as well  as to information on the provenance of such properties. Note, however, that the Discover section also contains data from other AiiDA databases, so for exploring this specific AiiDA database, one would need to find a material that originates from it.
```

> To illustrate on how to find the band gap UUID of silver bromide (AgBr), what we were looking for earlier as well, let's access the details page of AgBr in the main interface. You can then use the Explore button (the little AiiDA icon) next to the text `Band gap [eV]: 1.3` to go to the corresponding [actual AiiDA node](https://www.materialscloud.org/explore/mc2d/details/89315c33-2f9b-41ab-b7d4-22aff0ae75f4) in the web AiiDA provenance explorer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As the last step on this journey, to illustrate on how to find the band gap UUID of silver bromide (AgBr) that we were looking for earlier as well, let's access the details page of AgBr in the main interface. You can then use the Explore button (the little AiiDA icon) next to the text `Band gap [eV]: 1.3` to go to the corresponding [actual AiiDA node](https://www.materialscloud.org/explore/mc2d/details/89315c33-2f9b-41ab-b7d4-22aff0ae75f4) in the web AiiDA provenance explorer.
```

"let's access the details page of AgBr in the main interface" -> Maybe add a screenshot or something? Otherwise this is a bit difficult to follow.
